TEP 0097: Breakpoints for TaskRun and PipelineRuns (#572)
tektoncd/community: teps/0097-breakpoints-for-taskruns-and-pipelineruns.md

    - [Breakpoint before/after a TaskRun](#breakpoint-before-or-after-a-taskrun)
        - [before TaskRun](#before-taskrun)
        - [after TaskRun](#after-taskrun)
    - [Breakpoint on failure of a TaskRun](#breakpoint-on-failure-of-a-taskrun)
- [User Stories](#user-stories)
    - [CLI integration](#cli-integration)
        - [Environment access](#environment-access)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
-<!-- /toc -->
## Summary

Debugging TaskRuns can be tiresome. Re-running Tasks to figure out which part of a particular step is to blame would tax productivity.
By enabling breakpoint on failure for a TaskRun we should be able to halt a TaskRun at the failing step and get access to the
step environment to analyze cause of the failure. Unlike legacy systems, this allows the user to debug TaskRuns while the TaskRun 
is still running, hence improving developer productivity and Pipeline debuggability.

## Motivation

Lack of live debugging for Pipelines.

### Goals

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata: 
  generateName: quarante-deux-deux
spec:
  debug:
    breakpoint:
      onFailure: true
      beforeStep: ["task-build-archive"]

>       afterStep: ["deploy-frontend"]

Author: the latter. updated it !

This enhancement can allow a more interactive way of working with TaskRuns. CLI or IDE extensions could allow users to run a 
Task with breakpoint-on-failure and while the logs are being streamed, the user can be dropped to a shell in the breakpoint
failed step and allow the user to debug as they develop.

## Requirements

* To enable breakpoint on failure of a step, it would be necessary to update the Entrypoint to support lifecycle
changes when breakpoint on failure has been enabled.

* To enable breakpoint after a step, similar changes need to be made as the step above.

* To enable breakpoint before a step, we need to let the step know before execution that there is a breakpoint set.

* The step environment would have to have scripts which the user can use to clear the breakpoint or
mark the step as a success or a failure.

## TaskRun Proposal

### Breakpoint before/after a step
The `breakpoint` spec would contain the `beforeStep` and `afterStep` specs which are arrays containing names of steps
which the user plans on debugging. 

_This functionality will only support named steps_

```yaml
  debug:
    breakpoint:
      onFailure: true
      beforeStep: ["test-js"]

>       afterStep: ["push-to-registry"]

Reviewer: Both `before` and `after` be specified, and they're both lists, correct?

Reviewer 2: maybe renaming them to `beforeSteps` and `afterSteps` could make it clear that they are lists?

Author: done !

need it to continue running (not exit), not skip the next steps and signal health of the step. By disabling step skipping, 
stopping write of the `out.err` file and waiting on a signal by the user to disable the halt, we would be simulating a 
"breakpoint".

In this breakpoint, which is essentially a limbo state the TaskRun finds itself in, the user can interact with the step 
environment using a CLI or an IDE. 

##### Exiting breakpoint

To exit a step which has been paused upon failure, the step would wait on a file similar to `<step-no>.breakpointexit` which 
would unpause and exit the step container. eg: Step 0 fails and is paused. Writing `out.breakpointexit` in `/tekton/run/0/`
would unpause and exit the step container.

### Debug Environment Additions

#### Mounts

`/tekton/debug/scripts` : Contains scripts which the user can run to mark the step as a success, failure or exit the breakpoint.
Shared between all the containers.

`/tekton/debug/info/<n>` : Contains information about the step. Single EmptyDir shared between all step containers, but renamed 
to reflect step number. eg: Step 0 will have `/tekton/debug/info/0`, Step 1 will have `/tekton/debug/info/1` etc.

> #### Debug Scripts

Reviewer: All the scripts below talk about a `failed step 0` - are these scripts only meant to be used for the case of breakpoint on failure? Can they be used for other breakpoint types as well, with similar effects?

Author: It would be possible to use them in other scenarios as well.

`/tekton/debug/scripts/debug-continue` : Mark the step as completed with success by writing to `/tekton/run/<step-no.>/`. eg: User wants to mark

> failed step 0 as a success. Running this script would create `/tekton/run/0/out`.

Reviewer: Nice, so even in case of breakpoint on failure, the user can simulate success and continue?

Author: yep !

`/tekton/debug/scripts/debug-continue-failure` : Mark the step as completed with failure by writing to `/tekton/run/<step-no.>/`. eg: User wants to mark
failed step 0 as a success. Running this script would create `/tekton/run/0/out.err`.

`/tekton/debug/scripts/debug-breakpointexit` : Mark the step as completed with failure by writing to `/tekton/run/<step-no.>/`. eg: User wants to exit
breakpoint for failed step 0. Running this script would create `/tekton/run/0/out` and `/tekton/run/0/out.breakpointexit`.

## PipelineRun Proposal

Breakpoints would be enabled on PipelineRuns in a way that the logic of putting the breakpoints in place will be in the 
hands of the TaskRun controller and the step entrypoint.

Using the below spec we will look at how this will work with the following example.
    
```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata:
  generateName: quarante-deux-deux
spec:
  debug:
    breakpoint:
        onFailure: true
        beforeTask: ["task-build-archive"]

>         afterTask: ["deploy-frontend"]

Reviewer 2: same as above, what do you think of `beforeTasks` and `afterTasks` instead?

```

> ### Breakpoint before or after a TaskRun

Reviewer: Nice! :)

Since a pipeline may be running several tasks in parallel, in case of breakpoints, multiple ones could be hit in parallel, and the user will have the opportunity of interacting with all the tasks under debug.
Tasks that do not depend on any task being debugged will continue to run and be scheduled normally, correct?

Author: Task dependence is not something I have added right now. I will just update it now.

Author: > Tasks that do not depend on any task being debugged will continue to run and be scheduled normally, correct?
Yes. Those tasks will continue running normally.

Author: I have added your comment as a statement under `Task Dependence` in this proposal.

this PipelineRun and hence `onFailure` will be present in the breakpoints of all the children TaskRuns.

```yaml
apiVersion: tekton.dev/v1beta1
kind: PipelineRun
metadata:
  generateName: quarante-deux-deux
spec:
  debug:
    breakpoint:
      onFailure: true
```

## User Stories

### CLI integration
The scenario below provides details on what the user should do to debug their failed task.

#### Environment access
1. Get Failed TaskRun name.
2. Provide as an argument to the cli to start the TaskRun in debug mode. To get
   ```
   tkn taskrun debug failed-taskrun-1234 --on-failure --console-access
   ```
   In the above example we are recreating the TaskRun with the following patch.
   ```yaml
   metadata:
     name: failed-taskrun-1234-debug
   spec:
    debug: 
      breakpoint: 
        onFailure: true
   ```
3. Once the TaskRun is created and a step fails, the TaskRun Pod will be in the Running state. Till that time the CLI will wait 
   for the TaskRun to stop executing (due to failure) and go into the limbo state which would be leveraged for debugging.
   The CLI will open a shell to the step container which would be a reimplementation of `kubectl exec -it`.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer: It's nice to see alternatives but there's no pros and cons specified for them, so it's not clear why you picked the other option? I think the proposed option looks good, but it would be good to call out pros / cons for these, or if none is available mention it in a comment.

Author: Makes sense, I'll add these.

Author: Done ! :heavy_check_mark:

1. *"Breakpoint" as a map in the debugSpec.* (Used right now)

    ```yaml
    debug:
      breakpoint: 
        onFailure: true
        beforeStep: []
        afterStep: []
    ```
    The above shows what it could look like if the user could provide more points where they can halt the TaskRun i.e. before and after certain steps. 

2. *"Breakpoint on failure" as a map.*

    Based on 1. we can say that there might come a time, if rerunning steps does become a reality (which is highly likely), the user would like to debug before the failure takes place by enabling, something like beforeFailure which would rerun the step and halt it before execution.

    ```yaml
    debug:
      breakpoint: 
        onFailure: 
          before: true
          after: true
        beforeStep: []
        afterStep: []
    ```

3. *Enums rock* (Not applicable anymore)

    Using a list instead of a map allow us to maintain the breakpoint locations in the Tekton API and not on the client side.

    - Add a breakpoint before and after the failure.

      ```yaml
      debug:
        breakpoint: ["beforeFailure", "onFailure"]
      ```

>     - Create a breakpoint before and after execution of certain steps.

Reviewer 2: please add the con about specializing strings - https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/572#pullrequestreview-836578705

---
title: breakpoints-for-taskruns-and-pipelineruns
authors:
  - "@waveywaves"
creation-date: 2021-12-10

> last-updated: 2021-12-10

Reviewer 2: please update this date

> status: proposed 

Reviewer 2: you can mark the tep as implementable given that the design is present in here

Debugging TaskRuns can be tiresome. Re-running Tasks to figure out which part of a particular step is to blame would tax productivity.
By enabling breakpoint on failure for a TaskRun we should be able to halt a TaskRun at the failing step and get access to the
step environment to analyze cause of the failure. Unlike legacy systems, this allows the user to debug TaskRuns while the TaskRun 
is still running, hence improving developer productivity and Pipeline debuggability.

## Motivation

Lack of live debugging for Pipelines.

### Goals

Have an interface to debug TaskRuns and PipelineRuns at any stage of the Run in Tekton.

### Use Cases (optional)

This enhancement can allow a more interactive way of working with TaskRuns. CLI or IDE extensions could allow users to run a 
Task with breakpoint-on-failure and while the logs are being streamed, the user can be dropped to a shell in the breakpoint
failed step and allow the user to debug as they develop.

## Requirements

* To enable breakpoint on failure, before or after a Step in a TaskRun.

* To enable breakpoint on failure, before or after a TaskRun in a PipelineRun.

## TaskRun Proposal

### Breakpoint before/after a step

> The `breakpoint` spec would contain the `beforeStep` and `afterStep` specs which are arrays containing names of steps
> which the user plans on debugging.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `breakpoint` spec would contain the `beforeSteps` and `afterSteps` specs which are arrays containing names of steps
which the user plans on debugging.
```
```suggestion
The `breakpoint` spec would contain the `beforeStep` and `afterStep` specs which are arrays containing names of steps
which the user plans on debugging.
```
